.. _release_v1_3_5:

----------------
Version 1.3.5
----------------

*(Released: 2025-12-22)*

This is a stability and compatibility release focused on **NumPy 2.x
support**, **robust polar error-violin rendering**, and **cleaner CLI
behavior**. It resolves a breaking change introduced by NumPy 2.0
(removal of ``numpy.trapz``) that affected error-violin plotting and
downstream tests.

In addition, this release tightens internal compatibility utilities so
plotting functions behave consistently across NumPy versions.

New Features
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

* |Feature| **NumPy integration compatibility helper**
  (``kdiagram.compat.numpy.trapz``):

  A new wrapper providing trapezoidal integration across NumPy versions.

  - Uses ``numpy.trapezoid`` on NumPy 2.0+.
  - Falls back to ``numpy.trapz`` on older NumPy versions.
  - Centralizes numerical-compat logic in one place for maintainability.

Enhancements
~~~~~~~~~~~~

* |Enhancement| **More robust polygon ordering in error violins**:

  In :func:`~kdiagram.plot.errors.plot_error_violins`
  (``mode="optimized"`` / ``mode="cbueth"``), the "small -> large" ordering
  used to draw filled polygons now relies on the compat integration helper,
  ensuring consistent z-ordering and reducing accidental occlusion when
  overlaying models.

Bug Fixes
~~~~~~~~~

* |Fix| **NumPy 2.0+ crash in error-violin plots**:

  Fixed ``AttributeError: module 'numpy' has no attribute 'trapz'`` that
  caused failures in:

  - ``plot_error_violins`` overlay mode tests
  - split-spokes tests
  - CLI plot tests
  - warning behavior tests for mismatched names

* |Fix| **CLI stability for error-violin plotting**:

  The ``plot-error-violins`` CLI command now runs reliably under NumPy 2.x
  by avoiding direct calls to removed NumPy APIs in the plotting backend.

Documentation
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

* |Docs| **Release notes updated for NumPy 2.x**:

  Added guidance that ``k-diagram`` supports NumPy 2.x and that numerical
  integration in visual diagnostics is routed through ``kdiagram.compat``.

Testing & QA
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

* |Tests| **NumPy 2.x regression coverage**:

  Updated and validated the error-violin test suite to ensure overlay and
  split-spokes behaviors continue to pass under NumPy 2.x environments.

Backwards Compatibility Notes
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

* **No API breakage intended.** This release is a compatibility patch:
  user-facing plotting signatures are unchanged. If you previously relied
  on ``numpy.trapz`` indirectly through ``k-diagram``, that behavior is now
  provided via ``kdiagram.compat.numpy.trapz``.

Acknowledgments
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Thanks to the community and CI environments that surfaced NumPy 2.x
compatibility regressions early, enabling a targeted fix in this release.
