.. _release_v1_4_1:

----------------
Version 1.4.1
----------------

*(Released: 2026-06-05)*

This is a compatibility patch that fixes test-suite failures on
**pandas 2.2+** (Python 3.11 / 3.12 / 3.13) and corrects a
**Matplotlib colormap-registry** regression introduced in the test
helpers on older Python 3.9 environments. No public API is changed.

Bug Fixes
~~~~~~~~~

* |Fix| **pandas 2.2+ — ``DataFrame.to_gbq`` removed**:

  ``pandas.DataFrame.to_gbq`` was dropped in pandas 2.2.
  ``DataFramePropertyHandler.writers()`` in
  ``kdiagram.core.property`` previously evaluated ``obj.to_gbq``
  eagerly when building its writer-dispatch dict, causing an
  ``AttributeError`` that cascaded through 25 write-related tests
  on Python 3.11 / 3.12 / 3.13.

  Fixed by building the dict without the ``.gbq`` entry and
  conditionally adding it only when ``hasattr(obj, "to_gbq")``.

* |Fix| **pandas 2.x / 3.x — ``StringDtype`` not coerced in
  ``recheck_data_types``**:

  In pandas 3.x (and pandas 2.x with ``future.infer_string=True``),
  string-like DataFrame columns use ``pd.StringDtype`` instead of
  ``object`` dtype. The previous ``dtype == "object"`` guard in
  :func:`~kdiagram.utils.validator.recheck_data_types` did not
  recognise ``StringDtype`` columns, leaving them unconverted and
  causing ``TypeError: Cannot interpret StringDtype as a data type``
  when downstream code called ``np.issubdtype`` on the result.

  Fixed by broadening the column-type check to include
  ``pd.StringDtype`` alongside ``object`` dtype.

* |Fix| **pandas 2.x — ``UserWarning`` no longer emitted by
  ``pd.to_datetime``**:

  Older pandas emitted ``UserWarning("Could not infer format …")``
  before raising on mixed-type date columns; pandas 2.x raises
  ``ValueError`` directly without any warning.  Two tests in
  ``test_utils_validator`` expected that warning and failed with
  "DID NOT WARN" on Python 3.11 / 3.12 / 3.13.

  Fixed by emitting the ``UserWarning`` ourselves inside the
  ``except`` block of :func:`~kdiagram.utils.validator.recheck_data_types`,
  keeping behavior consistent across all supported pandas versions.

* |Fix| **Matplotlib ``ColormapRegistry`` — ``.get_cmap()`` not a
  method**:

  The ``patch_get_cmap`` test fixture called
  ``matplotlib.colormaps.get_cmap(name)``; ``ColormapRegistry``
  exposes subscript access (``colormaps[name]``) but not
  ``.get_cmap()``.  The call raised ``AttributeError``, was silently
  caught, returned ``None``, and then
  ``_sample_colors("tab10", 12)`` crashed with
  ``TypeError: 'NoneType' object is not callable`` on local Python
  3.9 environments with older Matplotlib.

  Fixed by switching the fixture to ``matplotlib.colormaps[name]``
  with a fallback to ``matplotlib.cm.get_cmap(name)`` for
  Matplotlib < 3.5.

Testing & QA
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

* |Tests| **Updated test assertions for pandas extension types**:

  Replaced ``np.issubdtype(dtype, np.number/floating)`` calls with
  ``pd.api.types.is_numeric_dtype / is_float_dtype`` in
  ``test_utils_validator`` — NumPy cannot interpret pandas extension
  dtypes such as ``StringDtype``.

* |Tests| **Robust ``is_string_dtype`` guard**:

  The assertion that a mixed-date column remains unconverted now
  checks ``pd.api.types.is_string_dtype`` rather than
  ``is_object_dtype``, covering both ``object`` (pandas < 3.x) and
  ``StringDtype`` (pandas 3.x).

* |Tests| **GBQ mock uses ``raising=False``**:

  ``test_write_gbq_passthrough`` now passes ``raising=False`` to
  ``monkeypatch.setattr`` so the fake ``to_gbq`` can be injected
  even when the attribute no longer exists on
  ``pandas.DataFrame``.

Backwards Compatibility Notes
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

* **No API changes.** This is a pure compatibility patch; all public
  function signatures and return types are unchanged.
* The ``.gbq`` writer is still available at runtime whenever
  ``pandas_gbq`` (or an equivalent library) has monkey-patched
  ``DataFrame.to_gbq`` back onto the class.

Acknowledgments
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Thanks to the CI matrix on Python 3.11 / 3.12 / 3.13 for surfacing
the pandas 2.2+ breakage promptly.
