.. _release_v1_4_0:

----------------
Version 1.4.0
----------------

*(Released: 2026-06-05)*

This is a major feature release that introduces a complete **Spatial
Diagnostics Module** for interpreting spatiotemporal probabilistic
forecasts across geographic networks of sites. It adds three
polar-spatial hybrid plots — including the "hedgehog" polar diagnostic
— and expands the gallery with high-level annotated examples for every
spatial function.

This release accompanies the publication of the associated methodology
paper: *Kouadio et al. (2026), Environmental Modelling & Software, 107052*
(:doi:`10.1016/j.envsoft.2026.107052`).

New Features
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

* |Feature| **Spatial Scatter Plot**
  (:func:`~kdiagram.plot.spatial.plot_spatial_scatter`):

  Geographic scatter of forecast quality at individual sites.

  - Color-encodes any scalar metric (CRPS, interval width, coverage,
    residual, etc.) at each (lon, lat) position.
  - ``bubble=True`` additionally scales marker area to a second column,
    making two diagnostic dimensions visible in one map.
  - Accepts a projected or geographic ``ax``; falls back to a plain
    Cartesian axes when GeoPandas is unavailable.

* |Feature| **Spatial Heatmap**
  (:func:`~kdiagram.plot.spatial.plot_spatial_heatmap`):

  Interpolated severity surface from scattered site measurements.

  - Cubic-spline or nearest-neighbor interpolation over a regular grid,
    with optional contour overlay (``show_contours=True``).
  - ``cmap``, ``levels``, and ``vmin/vmax`` expose full colormap control
    for publication-quality figures.

* |Feature| **Spatial Uncertainty Map**
  (:func:`~kdiagram.plot.spatial.plot_spatial_uncertainty`):

  Side-by-side or single-panel map of prediction-interval widths.

  - Highlights over-confident and over-dispersed regions by coloring
    interval width with a diverging palette.
  - ``hotspot_quantile`` parameter draws an optional contour around
    the highest-uncertainty sites.

* |Feature| **Spatial Coverage Map**
  (:func:`~kdiagram.plot.spatial.plot_spatial_coverage`):

  Empirical coverage-rate map for evaluating calibration across space.

  - ``nominal_coverage`` reference line and per-site deviation coloring
    expose geographic calibration failures at a glance.
  - ``flag_below`` marks sites that fall below a user-defined threshold
    with a distinct marker style.

* |Feature| **Spatial Model Comparison**
  (:func:`~kdiagram.plot.spatial.plot_spatial_comparison`):

  Multi-panel geographic comparison of metric fields from several models
  or forecast horizons.

  - Accepts a list of ``value_cols`` — one panel per column, with a shared
    colorbar and identical spatial extent for fair comparison.
  - ``ncols`` controls the subplot grid layout.

* |Feature| **Spatial Ordering Plot**
  (:func:`~kdiagram.plot.spatial.plot_spatial_ordering`):

  Geographic map that color-codes sites by their traversal rank and draws
  directional arrows indicating the ordering sequence.

  - ``order_by`` supports ``"lat"``, ``"lon"``, or any DataFrame column.
  - ``order_col`` allows a pre-computed rank or custom ordering key.
  - Returns the rank-ordered DataFrame alongside the axes for downstream
    use in polar diagnostics.

* |Feature| **Polar Hedgehog Diagnostic**
  (:func:`~kdiagram.plot.spatial.plot_polar_from_spatial`):

  Maps the geographic rank of each site to a polar angle
  (θᵢ = 2πi/N, North-clockwise), with radius proportional to the
  forecast metric, producing the "hedgehog" diagnostic introduced in the
  EnvSoft paper.

  - **Single-horizon mode**: one spike per site, colored by metric value.
  - **Multi-horizon ring mode**: K concentric rings, one per forecast
    horizon, normalized to a shared radial budget so all rings fit
    without overlap.
  - ``color_col`` overrides the default color encoding with any
    additional site attribute.
  - Reference rings at 25 %, 50 %, 75 %, and 100 % of the radial scale
    aid quantitative reading.

* |Feature| **Paired Spatial-Polar Composite**
  (:func:`~kdiagram.plot.spatial.plot_paired_spatial_polar`):

  Two-panel figure: geographic site map (left) + polar hedgehog (right),
  sharing a colorbar and a common site ordering so geographic and
  diagnostic views remain directly linked.

  - Identical API to :func:`~kdiagram.plot.spatial.plot_polar_from_spatial`
    for the polar panel; ``figsize`` scales both panels together.
  - Returns ``(ax_map, ax_polar)`` for further customization.

Enhancements
~~~~~~~~~~~~

* |Enhancement| **Vectorized spike rendering**: the internal
  ``_polar_spikes`` helper bins sites by color value and renders all
  spikes in one ``ax.plot`` call per bin using NaN separators, keeping
  performance acceptable for networks of hundreds of sites.

* |Enhancement| **Robust site-ordering helper** (``_compute_site_order``):
  a private utility shared by all three spatial-polar functions that
  handles latitude, longitude, arbitrary column, or pre-computed-rank
  ordering, with consistent tie-breaking and ascending/descending
  control.

* |Enhancement| **CAS metrics module improvements**
  (:mod:`kdiagram.metrics`):
  :func:`~kdiagram.metrics.cluster_aware_severity_score` parameter
  handling and column naming aligned with the published paper
  (``is_anomaly`` flag column, ``kernel``/``lambda_``/``gamma``
  keyword arguments).

Documentation
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

* |Docs| **New Spatial Gallery** (``docs/source/gallery/spatial.rst``):
  Eighteen gallery images with high-level, interpretation-focused
  examples for every spatial function, including an *Application
  Dashboard* section showing all eight plots applied together to a
  single network dataset.

* |Docs| **Expanded Spatial User Guide**
  (``docs/source/user_guide/spatial.rst``):
  Added detailed sections for :func:`~kdiagram.plot.spatial.plot_spatial_ordering`,
  :func:`~kdiagram.plot.spatial.plot_polar_from_spatial`, and
  :func:`~kdiagram.plot.spatial.plot_paired_spatial_polar`, including
  parameter tables, worked examples, and interpretation guidance.

* |Docs| **Updated Citations** (``docs/source/citing.rst``):
  The Environmental Modelling & Software paper is now listed with full
  journal metadata and BibTeX entry. The IEEE TGRS under-review paper
  on physics-informed deep learning for land subsidence is added as a
  second reference.

* |Docs| **Footcite references** in the spatial user guide link inline
  to the published EnvSoft paper via ``sphinxcontrib.bibtex``.

Testing & QA
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

* |Tests| **New spatial-polar test suites**
  (``tests/test_plot_spatial.py``):

  - ``TestPlotSpatialOrdering`` — 14 tests covering default ordering,
    custom column ordering, arrow rendering, color-encoding options,
    and ``savefig`` integration.
  - ``TestPlotPolarFromSpatial`` — 17 tests covering single-horizon
    mode, multi-horizon ring mode, reference rings, ``color_col``
    override, and polar-axes validation (``ax.name == "polar"``).
  - ``TestPlotPairedSpatialPolar`` — 15 tests covering two-axes
    return value, shared colorbar, panel independence, and combined
    ``order_col`` + multi-horizon modes.
  - Updated namespace export tests to verify all eight spatial
    functions are importable from both ``kdiagram.plot`` and
    ``kdiagram`` top-level.

Backwards Compatibility Notes
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

* **No API breakage.** All new functions are additive. Existing spatial
  functions (``plot_spatial_scatter`` through ``plot_spatial_comparison``)
  are unchanged.
* **New top-level exports**: ``plot_spatial_ordering``,
  ``plot_polar_from_spatial``, and ``plot_paired_spatial_polar`` are
  now available at ``kdiagram.*``.

Acknowledgments
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

This release implements the diagnostic framework described in the
peer-reviewed paper:

  Kouadio, K. L., Liu, R., Loukou, K. G. H., Liu, W., Qing, Z., & Liu, Z.
  (2026). A diagnostic framework for interpreting spatiotemporal
  probabilistic forecasts. *Environmental Modelling & Software*, 107052.
  ISSN 1364-8152. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envsoft.2026.107052
